.. image:: /static/training/beginner/qgis-inasafe/image6.*


Module 1: GIS for Developing Contingency Plan
=============================================

**Learning Objectives**

- Distinguishing data and information
- Understand the concept of GIS

**Data vs. Information**

In the first unit, we looked at OpenStreetMap and how to collect data and add it
to the worldwide map.  But what do we mean when we say that we collect data?  Is
this the same as collecting information?  Well, not exactly.

Data is raw facts.  Information is data that is organized and presented in such
a way as to be useful.  In other words, when we go mapping to collect locations
and facts about those locations, we have collected data - we have collected
facts.  To turn this data into information, we must make sense of it.  We must
present the data in such a way that it can be easily understood.

OpenStreetMap data is already made informative in an obvious way.  The map that
you see when you visit the OSM website is there because a computer has processed
all of the OSM data and used it to paint a nice looking map.  The map is
informative, and useful for us to see where places are in relation to us.

In this unit we will take this even further.  We will learn how to perform
geographic data analysis, and thereby learn how to make our data more useful,
informative, and effective.

**What is a Geographic Information System (GIS)?**

A Geographic Information System (GIS) is a system designed to enable people to
work with data related to places on the Earth.  A GIS allows the creation,
storage, manipulation, and analysis of geographic data.  GIS is a very broad
concept and can involve complex hardware and software.  But for most peopleâ€™s
purposes, a simple GIS software application is all that is required, and in this
unit we will learn how to use the excellent open-source application, Quantum
GIS.

GIS provides different ways to analyze data.  It enables us to ask complex
questions, such as:

*- where are all schools with more than 100 students?*

*- how many children live in a certain district?*

*- How many women live within 500 meters of a certain hospital?*

*- What is the shortest walking path from a given point to a hospital?*

GIS helps us to answer these sorts of questions.  In the previous unit we
learned how to collect data, and in this unit we will see how to analyze it.